in the year 2018 neoliberalism means
different things to different people and
it shouldn't there should be at this
point one will articulated understanding
of what neoliberalism means at least at
the elite academic level and preferably
around the world even in the lowly news
media and so on and there really isn't
neoliberalism has become a punching bag
for the left-wing but nobody even knows
in what direction they're punching I
don't know what can I mix metaphors here
it's an invisible punching bag it's a
it's a somewhat blurry punching bag that
nobody's quite sure no one's quite sure
where they're striking a blow because
there isn't a common understanding
certainly not with any depth of what
neoliberalism means or what it is that
they're they're criticizing
neoliberalism
is absolutely worthy of criticism it is
I think one of the most successful
ideologies in the history of humankind
it's certainly the most successful
political ideology within my lifetime
and it is an ideology that is now
starting to go into fashion however it's
not on the verge of some kind of
dramatic collapse
nobody is presuming that neoliberalism
is going to go through it's going to be
discredited the way the Soviet Union was
discredited it's hard to even imagine
what that what that would mean but
certainly neoliberalism has started to
raise some questions that may spark
different people interpret the world to
to come up with some new answers it may
as a paradigm finally go to fashion or
be discarded but it is saddening to see
that the critics of neoliberalism still
this day are so incapable of even
articulating what it is or identifying
with any position what it is they're
they're morally objecting to
so it's remain a kind of you know lame
area of political science discourse now
when you say that somebody is a critic
of something I think on a linguistic and
cultural level we tend to presume that
they really have a very high level of
expertise and the thing is they're
criticizing that they're conversant in
it that they're there they know the
genre very well if I tell you that I'm a
jazz critic right away you assume quite
a high level of
appreciation for jazz on my part if I
tell you that I'm a critic of the fine
arts of painting or what-have-you again
simply by virtue of being critic of this
field you assume I'm really immersed in
it and the reality is the people who
describe themselves as critics of
neoliberalism are very much the opposite
they're people who feel morally superior
to neoliberalism and you take absolutely
no interest in really understanding what
it is in its own terms who have no
sympathy with the people on the other
side of the aisle why it was they for
their part sincerely an idealistic alee
supported an advanced neoliberalism they
certainly don't read the literature of
liberalism they don't read any of the
foundational texts in the art form
they're not conversant even with what it
is they're criticizing politically so
you know you may say that this is a
problem across the board I don't think
it is I mean to be honest with you I
think this is an unusual example of
political science not just as an
academic discipline as a phenomenon
political commentary on our society I
don't know thumbing the ball when
everyone knows this is really one of the
one of the major of talking points one
of the major challenges intellectual and
political challenges of our time so I
received an email actually a message
within patreon from a supporter pay $1 a
month support this channel if you want
to pop up asking me in effect what my
opinion was on Donald Trump's latest
moves moves from Donald Trump that if
says some extent threaten the status quo
in terms of I don't know
global trade hierarchies the assumptions
of the globalization of free trade that
have been one pillar of neoliberalism
but I would emphasize free trade Accords
of this kind they they are one element
of neoliberalism there they're very far
from the only element there's more to it
than just that well that's that's most
what we're gonna focus on in this video
it's really important to point out it's
really important I've said this many
times many different contexts sympathy
is an analytical tool don't sympathize
with people just for the sake of being a
sympathetic human being because think
sympathy is somehow morally superior to
a lack of sympathy if you really want to
study what
and in the Vietnam War or in the
American bombing of Cambodia it's
important that you know enough that you
can look at the decisions made by
Richard Nixon Nixon was the president in
it States and you could say yeah I
understand how if I were in his position
I might have made that it's a I might
have done something like that it's it's
not useful to behave as they say many of
the critics of liberalism do as if oh
I'm at a great distance from this topic
I couldn't possibly I would never date
you I would never touch this with a
ten-foot pole no roll up your sleeves
get your hands dirty learn enough and
get close enough to the subject matter
then you can sympathize with the
decision-making going on the other side
especially with it with a with a mass
ideological and political phenomenon
like neoliberalism now it's true if I
were in the position of power that Tony
Blair was in in England for such a long
time I wouldn't have made any of this
agency pain terrible decisions
politically I don't have sympathy for
you know elite level executive level
neoliberal world leaders and Tony
Blair's is a very important example of
one however I can also look at his
political career look at the assumptions
he had when he came into office look at
what he values as a person I can even
look at you know the sort of unexamined
assumptions he has about the role and
function of government and who he asks
for advice which policy can positions
even considers and how political
priorities are set in his administration
and I can see how it is that the pattern
of governance emerges from these factors
I can sympathise in that sense even if I
sympathize with the sense of a sense of
revulsion for the subject matter of
being examined here but yes neoliberal
leaders like Tony Blair uh you know I
feel that I've lived you an incredibly
bleak period of human history this way I
know that may sound like an exaggeration
I've heard some conservatives and
right-wingers say this is the greatest
time you know to be alive I only hear
conservative saying that it's it's real
why why is it anyway it's only
conservatives say that only
conservatives seem to say that our
culture is on the brink of imminent
collapse these things seem to go
together the idea that we're currently
in a golden age and that it's incredibly
fragile and you know it's gonna collapse
any point there's a certain kind of
paranoid style to conservative political
discourse these
but you know growing up with Bill
Clinton in power I mean you know I do
have memories earlier than Bill Clinton
but I mean to go from Bill Clinton to
George W Bush and now you know George W
Bush to Barack Obama and now from Barack
Obama to - you know Donald Trump yeah in
many ways I do feel of the through an
incredibly bleak period in politics and
you know look I'm going to throw out
some examples here but the underlying
bleakness is frankly the feeling that in
politics that that nobody cares and you
know perhaps that is much more
depressing than being in a society or in
a period of time when it seems like
everyone's a fanatic so you guys know I
just recently read a book about the
history of the English Civil War 1640s
but only 16 30s 40s 50s the war and its
consequences go on and on you know in
the 17th century are reading this
history and people seem so passionate
about politics they seems so passionate
about very basic foundational concepts
and in politics like the role of
parliament and the role of the King and
the role of the law and the role of
democracy and you know to what extent
should voters be represented just cuz
they're human beings to what extent does
it based on how many I'm within are they
pay taxes or whether not they supported
the right side in the war we're really
basic concepts people seem to be
tremendously passionate about and at the
same time fanatical about and at the
same time they're they're stabbing each
other over there a lot of knife fights a
lot of duels to the death you know
breaking into the stuff cuz people were
really passionate about politics and you
know now I'm live with your period of
history I mean this is one of the
foundational concepts in neoliberal
political ideology one of the
fundamental ideological claims of
neoliberalism was that the globalization
sorry I guess they can say the global
liberalisation of trade which is
referred to as globalization would lead
to lasting peace as never before because
as one country became deeply involved in
the manufacturing process and financial
investment process of another there
would be an ineluctable
progress towards passivism on both sides
so the idea is here in as much as
Germany is reliant on oil exports from
Russia then Germany becomes very
reluctant to do anything that would
provoke a war with Russia now this is
true it's true it's just giving an
incredibly flattering description to
what's really a very bleak and
demoralizing situation there are human
rights and democracy in Russia is maybe
a 1 out of 10 and by the way sorry these
are unofficial ratings there is a
ratings agency Freedom House is the name
of a charity it's existed for a very
long time and they give an annual
ranking to every country in the world
for how democratic they are and how good
or how bad the human rights situation is
they give a score I think it's from one
to five not one to ten but you can look
it up what is the rating this year for
for Russia how close are they to getting
a zero in terms of the quality of
humorous democracy however country like
Russia is definitely a few points up
compared to Saudi Arabia you know in
Russia they have some democracy and some
human rights but not remotely enough
well guess what Germany is not in a
position to criticize Russia precisely
because of this form of economic
interdependence though that is the type
of term you see I mean if you read Pro
neoliberal tax from the early period
where these ideas were being sincerely
and hopefully profound it
I mean nearly neoliberalism promised you
know the end of slavery and the end of
war you know there were there were
people who were really sincere believers
in this it also promised the end to
non-tariff trade barriers it's a little
bit more technical but you know if you
care about economics you might care
about that you know the globalization of
trade was supposed to bring about a new
era of both peace and prosperity and
indeed of rising salaries for the poor
increasing and improving you know human
rights now there are some truth to their
claims there really is I mean it's
really worth examining how the world has
changed between 1990 and in 2018 and I
think there are some accomplishments
that we've got to give the neoliberals
credit for but precisely what they've
described here so positively the
flipside to is a
incredibly depressing okay so you have
economic interdependence between Germany
and Russia
so Russia invades the Ukraine outright
starts slaughtering and torturing people
and yes ever a detailed specific
accounts of crimes against humanity of
atrocities committed by Russian forces
in the Ukraine that will give you
nightmares
they're horrifying sometimes by Russian
troops themselves and by mercenaries
employed by the Russians it is it is
complex on the ground there who is
working for whom but everyone knows
Russia is is predominantly responsible
for what's been going on on that part of
the Ukraine okay
so because economically you're dependent
on Russian oil in Germany in France and
so on you're not gonna stand up and do
the right thing now look sorry and on a
huge scale this is the situation with
Saudi Arabia and what is Saudi Arabia on
a scale of one to ten for democracy and
human rights
who is gonna stand up and say to Saudi
Arabia no you have to you have to meet
this minimum standard democracy and
human rights there there was an
assumption in neoliberalism that is part
of this unraveling progress of the world
that the minimum standards of democracy
human rights scientific and
technological progress will all pull up
the countries that were at the bottom of
the rankings that countries like Saudi
Arabia and and you know Russia no longer
communist Russia post-communist Russia
would just be would be pulled up to top
of the ranks now technologically this
has happened I mean scientifically and
technologically a country like Saudi
Arabia has made unbelievable progress a
country like China has made unbelievable
progress but how much pressure has there
been on China to meet minimum standards
of human rights democracy nil zero if
anything and one of my professors here
professor Google Wong wrote a book about
this I could do a book review of it I
could not um some people say there's
even a disincentive that not only is
there no positive incentive to meet
these higher standards whether
globalization and neoliberalism provide
an incentive going the other way
so the question deserves to be asked if
Donald Trump is now going to bring about
a collapse of that globalized free trade
system if this is the first step towards
a new era of politics being
fundamentally protectionist more tariff
based so anti global free trade being
anti anti free-trade anti-immigration
anti-refugee more a matter of isolated
national units protecting their own
interests instead of engaging in free
trade even when it's not in their
interest because on a mathematical level
guys we could just look up you can
Google right now us you know balance of
payments deficit I mean in terms of the
value of what the United States is
exporting versus the value of what its
importing there have always been reasons
to be alarmed about globalization and
the impact it has the United States
there have always been reasons to be
alarmed about the North American Free
Trade Agreement the free trade agreement
that America has just with Mexico and
the impact that's had on the America
this isn't new it's really not these
questions have been on the table for a
long time and because of the faith in
neoliberalism especially amongst
governing elites nobody's been coming up
with new answer those questions so yes
it is possible that Donald Trump could
signal at the start of a new era of
coming up with new answers to those old
questions it's also possible that he's
just a bump in the road and as soon as
Donald Trump is out of power the next
person is elected is going to restore
all these free trade agreements and
it'll go back to the the status quo that
was unquestioned that was unquestioned
for example by Obama and unquestioned by
you know George W Bush before so on and
so forth um if we have this breakdown of
international economic interdependence
if we have a move more towards
self-reliance either for nations
economically or what's more likely for
national blocks
smaller blocks of nations I mean
obviously the Netherlands is not gonna
try to be self-reliant but maybe you're
gonna have smaller clusters of some of
those countries with trade barriers
around them obviously the United States
and Canada will be very likely to form a
trade bloc under themselves but probably
excluding Mexico evidently they're
already you know breaking off bringing
up the possibility of a lot of other
international trade agreements mmm past
present future if you move more into
that world
is it possible that this will be a net
benefit for human rights or indeed
animal rights this is one of the reasons
I got this question is it possible that
when the United States ceases making
money exporting meat Europe and China
you're gonna get a reconsideration these
things well it's not impossible I mean
you know we live in a very peculiar era
when scrutiny and political
participation have never been cheaper
and have never been easier and yet
public indifference is at an all-time
high it's it's tremendously depressing
to live in a period of time where the
late motif of politics is nobody cares
it's not just the case the people in the
United States don't care about human
rights in Saudi Arabia you know people
in Canada don't care about human rights
on First Nations reserves they don't
care about human rights of the Cree and
the chief way people in the United
States nobody seems to care about the
fact that human rights in Florida I'm
sorry but Florida it really is a good
example in states where the quality of
government has deteriorated to an
absolutely terrifying point you can come
up with with all kinds of examples of
that it's also true I mean there's
indifference both local and
international breakdown of law and order
and basic human rights in in Mexico so
it's not easy to say that because the
problem is far away people aren't
different to it when you have examples
of this profound indifference within
each of these countries you know of
course even within the United Kingdom or
what have you
where both the governing elites and you
know the hoi polloi the mass the mass of
regular humanity and voters
fundamentally do not care even though
now they can have access to information
instantly and for free over the internet
you can find exactly the information on
exactly that topic you don't have to go
down to an archive in a downtown major
city and leaf through government
publications I used to do that stuff I
was like you know the technology of
getting the information and have
foreign opinion is incredibly simple
even the technology of sending in your
opinion if you want to write a letter to
Parliament if you want to contact you
know your remember what have you if you
want to protest if you want to give a
deposition at City Hall everything has
become infinitely easier than it was
just a few decades ago and yet the
motivation is utterly lacking so if
Donald Trump now I don't know let's say
he starts the ball rolling for you know
a general collapse in international
trade agreements and for that collapse
to happen what you really need is a
shift in attitude amongst ruling elites
where they stop looking at an abstract
greater good of assuming that infinite
deregulated free trade is good for all
parties and they instead start looking
at their own workers their own
unemployment the value of what they're
producing at the value of what they're
exporting versus what they're importing
and start saying okay how can we how can
we make balance of payments how can we
optimize our economy not necessarily in
a protectionist way protectionism is one
response to that but just basically
where they start looking out for their
own their own national self-interest
instead of working on the dogmatic
assumption that unnatural oh sorry
unlimited free trade is going to benefit
all parties more than any specific
interventions or guidelines tariffs or
what have you if you have that kind of a
shift then you're going to have the
decline both of actual economic
interdependence and you're gonna have
the decline of the ideology whose one
crucial part of neoliberalism you're
gonna have the decline of the ideology
that economic cooperation itself is the
engine for the improvement of democracy
and human rights a great example this
you gotta be old enough to remember it
when Bill Clinton went to China Bill
Clinton made a long trip to China long
journey and at that time one of the big
issues in China was the status of Tibet
and the lack of human rights for
Tibetans and whether or not
to that whatever get its independence
Bill Clinton was the first president in
States to give the Chinese ie two to
admit that Tibet was a province of China
prior to that every person in a state
said no we don't we don't recognize
Tibet as part of China the Tibet at some
right to exist as an independent country
that had been wrongfully annexed by by
China in terms of international law and
Bill Clinton shrugged his shoulders and
said okay Tibet will forever remain a
part of China in terms of the words
given by Bill Clinton himself and by
people who were in his office and again
down to the newspapers and so on the
pleasing illusion that everyone's fun
was no no there's no point in
barricading them there's no point in
cutting them off from international
trade to punishing them there's no point
in treating communist China the way the
United States was treating communist
Cuba as if sorry it's a total hypocrisy
right there's no point imposing on China
the same kind of isolation from world
trade that they keep as there's no point
in isolation the way forward is to
engagement that through exactly trade to
I mean that that's the engagement we're
talking about here we're not talking
about you know anyway we're not talking
about taking Chinese members of
parliament and giving them a guided tour
of Congress and explaining to them how
elections work we're not talking about
the kind of engagement were just saying
that by the the free flow basically of
money investment technology and you know
economic integration that's what really
happened one of the great examples this
is from the Economist magazine the
Barbie doll would be quote unquote made
in China but it was an American company
and all the the designing was done in
America and all the parts would be sent
to China including even the paint they'd
just be assembled and painted and put in
the package and shine and then sent back
to America the breakdown of where the
the components came from a remarkably
large percentage of the value of the
iPhone the Apple iPhone actually goes to
Germany because so many of the fine
components are made in Germany and then
shipped to China and assembled you know
the meet the extent to which economic
production manufacturing has been
integrated internationally since then
it's unbelievable and it's true this
integration this form of economic
interdependence
creates a disincentive for war it also
creates a disincentive for any kind of
political scrutiny of one country
against another I think there's an
argument to be made it also leads to a
disincentive for in domestic policy for
governments taking responsibility for
their own economy for example for the
plight of their own workers and this is
a new you can go back to the 1980s and
people were already saying oh if we have
free trade with Mexico then car
manufacturing factories car factories
are gonna close down in Detroit and move
to Mexico and in many cases this was
literally true word like the the factory
was disassembled the parts of the
factory the machinery were moved to
Mexico placed a new factory and and
started manufacturing the same car parts
just across the border right so sorry I
remember I read an article that went
into detail but a factor of this was
absolutely literally true the machinery
itself
was relocated to Mexico a new factory
was built ins and so on whether the jobs
go to Mexico or the jobs go to China
this is an oil story this criticism of
neoliberalism isn't isn't something new
but the question is will people now
start coming up with new answers will
governments and you know specifically
most of these countries government
really is an oligarchy it's controlled
by a small elite it's controlled by
people like like Donald Trump will
people start caring more about you know
the the National wheel which includes
very much you know the the the status of
the poor or they continue to subscribe
to a specific version of laissez-faire
economics that unlimited freedom of
investment import export and trade will
lead to an optimal situation for the
rich and the poor alike even when we
have such glaringly obvious evidence
that this isn't the case and when as in
the case of China Saudi Arabia and even
Russia it's proven that in politically
in terms of democracy and human rights
the real world outcome of neoliberal
globalization is not that the exchange
of Technology leads to all of
the boats floating up on a rising tide
to rising higher and higher levels of
human rights and democracy on the
contrary with this tends to lead to is a
race to the bottom where countries are
not just competing for the lowest wages
for internationally competitive
manufacturing conditions what-have-you
but we're also human rights and
democracy itself if anything there's an
incentive for these to remain at a
minimal level or at a very low level
indeed where there is no pressure on
Thailand to have elections when Thailand
went from being a democracy skater ship
there is no pressure on Russia for it to
meet minimum standards of democracy
human rights so on for Saudi Arabia and
China and guess what guys as I think
I've already mentioned back in the year
2000 when the United States had a phony
rigged election the election of george w
bush there was absolutely no pressure on
the united states to meet any kind of
minimum standards of democracy and human
rights either so it cuts both ways okay
if you want to ask me a question like
this and get a 25 minute answer hit me
up on patreon pay $1 to support the they
exist this channel I know the first
thing has asked me this question may not
be happy with my answer but hey
satisfaction is not guaranteed but
getting a thought-provoking answer is
guaranteed and I got to tell you guys I
appreciate the the question I appreciate
the opportunity to talk about this
before I made this video I searched my
own channel for the word neoliberalism
other than remarkably few videos
expressly about this topic I think many
have mentioned it and I'm burdened with
the awareness although I opened this
video complaining I have all this
experience in academia meeting and
talking to people with PhDs and seeing
their publications seeing their their
articles interview seeing how in
academia very very few of the professors
even their formal writing and research
are really capable of addressing
neoliberalism in a meaningful way I know
that remarkably few of the professors
are able to give this kind of
spontaneous conversation about Neil
neoliberalism as implications so I do
feel a little bit of a shred of
responsibility to take what I know and
share it it was clear to me even when I
was an undergraduate that you know
neoliberalism its origin its nature and
its future fate was going to be one of
the most important
for my generation and it still is when
you're living through that time it's
really easy to trivialize these people
it's really easy to laugh at someone
like Tony Blair and think that his ideas
don't matter because he's such a fool
it's easy to laugh at george w bush and
think oh well all this will be over in
eight years look how many how many
decades have you got left any of us it's
sad but you know this is your time this
is your generation this is the fate of
your world and I you know I think you
need to have the honesty and and the the
vulnerability to look at what's come and
gone with people like Tony Blair the
opportunity that's come and gone with
with someone like like Barack Obama
someone like George W Bush and realize
this is it I mean you know this is your
world this is your generations you know
contribution to politics and so on you
can sit back in indifference you can sit
back with sneering contempt you could
exercise this sense of phony moral
superiority as I think most of the
critics of neoliberalism do and say oh
well you know many Americans you say oh
well he's not my president they talk as
if they feel no connection this or you
know you need to have the humility to
roll up your sleeves and get your hands
dirty get involved have some sympathy
for the devil realize what's motivating
the people on the other side what their
illusions and delusions are and maybe
what their their sincere sincere goals
are and you have to take up the
heartbreaking work of trying to make a
difference in a world that is
fundamentally indifferent more
indifferent than ever before despite
having more access to information more
access to government than ever before
that's the road we've got cut out for us
in what remains the 21st century